
Leslie Wu
Terrify, a VDR terrain rendering system.

Implementation details
----------------------

Overview:

Terrify is a terrain visualization program that implements
view-dependent refinement, screen-space error control, frustum
culling, and optionally enforces a strict polygon budget. 

Terrify is based mostly on Lindstrom and Pascucci's work in
"Visualization of Large Terrains Made Easy". It adopts their
pre-calculation and runtime methods for view-dependent refinement
(except their indexing scheme), but extends the framework to either
support a strict polygon budget or to amortize the cost of updating
the terrain over multiple frames without multithreaded programming.


Offline processing:

A short (several seconds on a Gigahertz machine, for a 4x2k data set)
preprocessing phase computes error terms used at run-time for
view-dependent refinement. We implement Lindstrom and Pascucci's
method that computes a nested sphere hierarchy of errors. For fast
processing, we use dynamic programming to memoize the results of the
top-down error term computation.

For each vertex, the preprocessing phase produces a radius term and an
error term. The error term is assumed to be between 0 and 255 so it is
stored as a unsigned byte. The radius term exceeds 255, but there are
only ~lg(n) possible radial terms, where n is the dimension of the
data set. Thus, we compress the data, storing a 256 element lookup
table as well as the radial index in bytes.


View-Dependent Refinement and Error Control:

The rendering follows Lindstrom and Pascucci's top-down mesh
refinement algorithm. We traverse the regularly subdivided mesh
top-down, stopping recursive subdivision of a triangle if the error is
lower than a user-specified parameter.

Triangle elements are normally drawn using the glBegin(GL_TRIANGLES);
command. We did not implement triangle stripping because enforcing a
strict polygon budget in general alters the triangle traversal,
destroying the inherent coherency.

Error control works naturally as part of the recursive triangle
subdivision.


Polygon Budget:

Lindstrom and Pascucci do not implement a polygon budget. We chose two
non-conflicting approaches.

First, we noticed that to ensure a crack-free tesselation, it is
sufficient to guarantee that there exists an error value such that all
vertices that have a higher error (as defined in section 3.1.2 [1])
are active while all the vertices that have a lower error are
inactive.

The function call stack normally encodes what triangles are going to
be subdivided. In terms of the implicit bintree structure of the
terrain set, this is equivalent to a depth-first search. Instead, we
use a priority queue and continually subdivide the triangle with the
highest error, putting its children into the priority queue.

We stop once (# triangles drawn + # triangles in queue >= triangle
limit) to ensure that the total number of triangles drawn at less than
the triangle limit. Additionally we must triangle a few extra
triangles that have the same error as the cutoff error
value. Otherwise, we are not guaranteed a watertight tesselation.

The other approach simply increases or decreases tau, the pixel error,
to approximate the triangle limit. We implemented this system for
efficiency reasons. The priority queue method slowed down the
framerate by slightly more than a factor of 2.


Frustum Culling:

We cull based on the left and right view frustums. Note that we do not
do top and bottom view frustum culling. The error metric and top-down
refinement procedure described in [1] do not work with top and bottom
frustum culling; They assume that the viewing direction is parallel to
the ground plane.

Optionally, we permit the user to enable "X-axis rotation
compensation". This simply increases the view angle as the user looks
down.


Amortization:

To further increase framerate, we amortize the cost of updating the
terrain over several frames, without using threads. 

We divide the polygon budget into N buckets, and render approximately
1/N*triangle_limit triangles per frame, storing the results in a
vertex array. Every N frames, we swap the pointers that denote the
vertex array we are drawing and the vertex array we are updating.
In our implementation N=4, though this can easily be changed.

This results in a typical 2-5x speedup, depending on the number of
triangles in the current tesselation. To avoid popping artifacts when
the user turns to the right or left, we increase the view angle in one
direction based upon the speed of viewpoint rotation.


Results:

On the P3 lab machines, we ran a timedemo benchmark that computes the
average framerate over 90 frames, while the viewpoint traverses the
terrain from one corner to the other.

[4097x2049 data set, 4096x2048 texture with trilinear mipmapping,
4-pixel error, 32k triangle limit. 640x480 resolution. CVA = Compiled
Vertex Arrays]

	 16.1fps	Priority Queue, 4-pixel error
	 41.6fps	Normal, 4-pixel error
	 51.0fps	Priority Queue w/ CVA Amortization
	110.8fps	Normal w/ CVA Amortization

References:

1: 
Peter Lindstrom and Valerio Pascucci. "Visualization of Large
Terrains Made Easy." IEEE Visualization 2001
